---
title: MySQL, SQLite and SQLAlchemy Notes
layout: post
categories: notes database
last_modified_at: 2020-08-19 18:22:48
---

## SQLite

- It is a micro database that can work in memory or a saved in file, eg, `store.db` .
- Queries are same as any other SQL.
- if `sqlite3` is installed then it opens a shell in command line, just like mysql shell.
- to open a file, use `.open FILENAME` to open an existing database.
- `sqlite3 my.db` to work on this file
- `.mode csv` and then `.import data.csv orders` loads csv to db, creates if not exists.
- `.schema orders` to check.


## SQLAlchemy

- It is ORM for Python, has two parts
  - CORE - can be used to manage SQL from python,
  - ORM - can be used in Object oriented way to access SQL from python.
- FlaskSQL_Alchemy is extenstion to SQLAlchemy.
- **ORMs** allow applications to manage a database using high-level entities such as classes, objects and methods instead of tables and SQL. The job of the ORM is to translate the high-level operations into database commands.
- It is an ORM not for one, but for many relational databases. SQLAlchemy supports a long list of database engines, including the popular MySQL, PostgreSQL and SQLite.
- The ORM translates Python classes to tables for relational databases and automatically converts Pythonic SQLAlchemy Expression Language to SQL statements


## MySQL

Installation:
- `brew install mysql`

Start Server:
- `brew services start mysql` - background mysql start
- `mysql.server start` - no background
- `mysql_secure_installation` - run this and set root pwd, etc.
- `ps -ef | grep mysqld` process

Login:
- `mysql -u root -p` then enter password

Queries:

```sql
show DATABASES;

create user 'bob_me'@'localhost' identified with mysql_native_password by 'bob_pwd';

create database bob_db;

grant all privileges on bob_db.* to 'bob_me'@'localhost';
```

Client - SequelPro:
- Connecting:
  - Standard
  - Host: 127.0.0.1
  - enter uername and password and connect.

Shutdown Server:
- `mysql.server stop` - stops server

Other Notes:
- Column and Table names are case-sensitive.
- `mysqladmin` is also installed

Trouble Shooting:
- If you see error in clients, eg Sequel Pro, it might not be ready yet for a new kind of user login, [link](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/51179516/sequel-pro-and-mysql-connection-failed).
- do `ALTER USER 'root'@'localhost' IDENTIFIED WITH mysql_native_password BY 'newrootpassword';` then try loggin in.


## Mongo DB


## Redis

- `redis-server` to start the server.



---

More on:
- [Flask SQL Alchemy](../flask-notes/#flask-sqlalchemy)